hello everybody welcome to my
planetarium show
for june of 2021
and i've chosen to set this up initially
for the morning of june the 10th
where there's a rather special event
going to happen so let's get things
moving
what we're going to do is aim up towards
the sun
at around 10 o'clock in the morning and
hopefully if it's a nice sunny day on
thursday the 10th then we will be able
to see
a partial solar eclipse the first one
for quite some years to be visible from
england and in particular cambridge
where i'm based
so here we have the sun and the moon
just visible there
in the image on the screen of course you
won't see the moon like that because the
sun's so bright
and of course don't look at the sun with
any form of optical aid or indeed
without the protection
of proper eclipse glasses or
or some sort of eye protection because
you will damage your eyes
but this is what the moon is going to do
it's going to pass across
the face of the sun it's not going to
block out more than about
a quarter of the total disk so it won't
make the
sky go dark and in fact if you're not
aware that the eclipse is in progress
you probably won't even
notice it starts at around 10 past
10 in the morning and will be at its
maximum about quarter past 11
and then finish after noon sometime
so you've got a window of about an hour
around about 11 when it's best to see it
as i say look using eclipse glasses that
are really dark
or find some way of projecting the image
onto a screen rather than observing it
directly so that we don't hurt your eyes
so we're now running forward the moon is
moving away from the sun in the sky
there as it
goes along its orbit around the earth
and we're letting time run down to
sunset so there's some just on the
horizon there
and what we're going to do now is have a
look just above the tree line here
we've got a very bright object that's
the planet venus
so with this software i can zoom right
in as if i have a very powerful
telescope
and here we see venus and you can see
that it's showing
around about a three-quarter phase disk
disc
all we can see of course with venus is
the cloud tops
it has such a thick atmosphere over 100
times as dense as our own atmosphere
very very thick indeed we can't see
through it to the surface
at all only uh by dropping probes
in have we've been able to discover
what's going on beneath the cloud tops
so that's venus and you will have to
just as the sun is setting
just as the sun's gone below the horizon
it's the best time
but you also need a very low clear
horizon
uh without any tall trees because
otherwise it will be obscured
so um quite a narrow opportunity to
see it just at the moment
so he pulled back there again and he saw
it disappear just above the tree line
so we'll let time run forward a little
bit further until
10 o'clock in fact and
that will get the sun a little bit
further below the horizon of course
at this time of year it doesn't stay
down for very long there's venus
very very bright right on the horizon
but now
just above the tree we've got three
things we've got the two bright stars of
castor and pollux in
gemini the heavenly twins but here we're
going to zoom in
on mars the red planets and mars is now
getting quite a long way away from the
earth
and so it's looking like a rather
smaller disc
to us even through our telescopes it's
got two moons
phobos which is just hiding behind the
planet there and dmos that you can see
if we zoom in closer to the disc you'll
see the polar cap
up there to the top right and the dark
desert markings
one or two crater light features some of
those are impact craters some of the
tops
of extinct volcanoes on the surface of
mars
there are no active volcanoes left as
far as we know
but we'll pull back away from mars and
look at it another time because it
really is getting too far away
for us to see properly in great detail
now but i just thought i'd show that it
was still visible
even in the twilight there
so now we'll run on until the sky gets
properly dark and really that's
uh only between the hours of around
about
midnight through till about two o'clock
in the morning
of course the uh we're on british summer
time and so
uh one o'clock is the true astronomical
midnight
so now we're looking south and
we have the constellation of bhutes the
herdsmen
with the very bright star aldebar up
not aldebara arcturus marking out the
bottom of the kite shape arrangement
there's
the graphic of the herdsman himself you
can see the bright star arcturus let's
zoom in a little bit closer
it's relatively nearby only 37 light
years away
and just a little bit more massive than
the sun
but it's somewhat older it's 7 billion
years old the sun is around 5 billion
years old
and as a result it has already entered
the red giant
stage of its existence where it's
swelled up
and cooled its surface as it uh
reorganizes its inner workings
so that's older barring but i've chosen
this particular spot
to stop at just two minutes past
midnight
and the reason for that will become
clear because as we uh
suddenly let time run forward again
you'll suddenly see the starlink
satellites
make a parade there they go all whizzing
up through the constellation of budes
you can use
arcturus as a signpost so you see a
stream of starling satellites
and at the bottom traveling horizontally
there's the lacrosse
five american spy satellite they still
don't
admit these lacrosse satellites exist
but they're very bright and easy to spot
so they're not fooling anyone so that's
just at two minutes past midnight on the
10th of june
if you've got a clear sky find arcturus
to the south and fairly high up as a
signpost and you'll see that event
happen
just to the left of the constellation of
the herdsmen the kite-shaped one there
we have the
northern crown corona borealis an
interesting little
constellation really does look like a
crown even just with the stick diagram
and there aren't any tremendously bright
stars in it
but it does contain quite a range of
interesting galaxies
so if you're interested in searching for
relatively
difficult galaxy targets then that's a
good place to go at this time of year
inside the bowl of the crown there
we're going to now move a little bit
further over to the left
to the constellation of hercules and
hero
and this has a characteristic four star
keystone shape arrangement which you can
see there we're now going to
line up on it and
there's the stick diagram showing the
keystone arrangement
so you've got boutez then corona and
then hercules
there's hercules the hero he's upside
down of course a lot of things in
astronomy are up the wrong way
and there's just something you have to
get used to
now we're going to look along one edge
of
the keystone formation here and center
up
and zoom right in you can see a fuzzy
patch already
and here is one of my favorite objects
the great globular cluster
messier object number 13. this is
one of about 400 globular clusters that
are like micro galaxies
that orbit round the outside of the
milky way indeed they may be
the nuclei of defunct galaxies that have
come too close to the milky way and been
stripped of all of their
other outer layers so that was messier
13. here's another one
messier 92 also in hercules
again around about half a million stars
all packed together
quite tightly and these are very very
old stars as i said
i think there's probably a small black
hole right in the center
and these are actually the nuclei of
stripped galaxies
so pull back away from that one and look
at the third one also in hercules
just to make the point that there are an
awful lot of these
and you can go surfing from one to
another this one's called the prize
comet globular cluster it's one of the
more distant ones a hundred thousand
light years from us
and um often gets mistaken for a comet
which is where has that rather curious
name but
well worth chasing some of these down
they always look to me like
diamonds on a velvet cloth with the
stars shining against the
darkness of the outer background of
space
so we'll move on now away from hercules
and have a look at some other
objects that we've uh don't usually hear
very much about i've picked a couple of
unusual ones
for the remainder of this tour and one
of them here is down in the
constellation of scorpio the scorpion
and it's the blue horseshoe nebula where
there's a lot of blue light
reflecting back off a cloud of gas and
dust
the blue light is coming from that very
bright star
it's a very hot uh star hotter even than
white hot so giving off
a lot of blue light and the blue light
is hitting the gas and bouncing back to
us
so it's called the reflection nebula and
that's just in the constellation of
scorpio
but there are so many objects in scorpio
in this part of the sky
you see the bright red star mentaries
just at the bottom of the screen there
antares means not mars in translation
because it's a very similar colour to
mars
but we also got this constellation of
yucas and
this is one that is very rarely talked
about
it's actually the 13th member of the
constellations of the zodiac but somehow
got left out perhaps because 13 is an
unlucky number in some people's opinion
it's quite a big constellation and as
such has a number of interesting objects
in it
and one that i particularly like is
called the ghost of mars
here it is again it's a
round disk-like object and so in poor
telescopes it looked a bit
like a planet they called it a planetary
nebula
what you've got is right in the center
there the dead white dwarf
star that has blown off its outer layers
into a smoke ring in space forming that
circular feature that we could see so
that's the ghost of mars a planetary
nebula the remains
of a sun-like star the sun will form one
of these
giant smoke cranes and blow its outer
layers off
into space in the very very distant
future
it's not something you have to worry
about anytime soon of course
what we're looking at there is the star
clouds of
sagittarius the densest part of the
milky way
as it's descending towards the horizon
it's very dense there because we're
actually looking
towards the center of the milky way
galaxy
where the enormous bulge of stars is a
very very crowded region
letting time run forward again now we've
got a few
the blue markings there are where meteor
showers sometimes come from they're
called the radiant
points and the software stellarium that
i'm using for this show
shows you where those radiant points are
for different
meteor showers
if you want to know more about that look
at one of my other talks on
shooting stars and space rocks i think
it's called
so now it's the early morning 2 30 and
we're going to have a look
at jupiter the king of the planets
here it is and this is what you would
see with a small telescope there are a
couple of stars there
and three out of the four big moons
the galilean moons that are sort of
almost planet-sized in their own right
orbiting around jupiter the fourth one
is hiding behind jupiter
on this particular occasion but here we
have the planet itself
as you would see it with a very powerful
telescope with the dark
dusty brown cloud belts running around
just north and south of the equator
other belts
lots of white whirls and spots to see
those are all
giant hurricanes in the atmosphere of
jupiter
but we're going to move off and have a
little look at
its moons this is io and
io is the most volcanic place in the
solar system
here all those features that you see on
the surface
there are volcanoes now you can't see it
like this
with a telescope this is an image from
the voyager spacecraft that flew past it
and it shows it covered in all those
yellow and orange colors
those are all different forms of sulfur
from the volcanoes
now just as an extra here is one of the
little moons of jupiter the tiny potato
shaped
uh small moons called amalfia and
it's very red in color covered in what
material that we think is made of
chemicals called pholines
which are carbon hydrogen nitrogen-based
compounds
that may be the precursors of living
molecules
so that's amalfia one of the inner but
rather small moons
going to the largest moon in the solar
system now this is ganymede
it's actually larger than the planet
mercury so if this orbited the sun we
would call it a planet
but because it orbits the planet jupiter
we call it a moon
covered in glaciers and ice flows
uh one or two impact craters on the
surface there very interesting mixed
terrain
on the surface of ganymede and the
fourth moon of jupiter we're going to
look at
is callisto this is just a little bit
smaller than ganymede but still
a planet-sized moon in its own right
this has a lot more of the craters on
the surface
and not so much of the other types of
geological activity
it's a very ancient and and dead surface
in that respect
whereas uh ganymede seems to be
undergoing
various geological processes right up to
the present day
so it was the jupiter system and you see
jupiter there
above the uh south west horizon
at about 2 30 in the morning to its
right
is also the planet saturn not quite as
bright
saturn smaller and further away so that
explains why
a small telescope will show you it like
this with the rings
and the disc of the planet in the center
there very spectacular
and some of its moons it's an
interesting challenge to figure out how
many of its moons you can track down
you'll almost always be able to see the
big orangey one at the right there titan
just gone off the screen as we zoom in
on the planet itself you can see the
gap in between the main a and b rings
called the cassini division and the
lesser gap right towards the edge
in the b ring called the enkei division
you can also see how the
disc of the planet is casting a shadow
on the rings
now we've swung over to titan the
largest moon again
a planet-sized moon with an atmosphere
one and a half
times the density of the earth's
atmosphere so a very interesting world
covered in this orange smog layer in the
atmosphere made of organic chemicals
the atmosphere is mostly nitrogen with
things like methane and carbon dioxide
present as well
and it seems to have lakes of liquid
methane and rivers
and a whole weather system based on
methane
rather than based on water as we have it
because the temperature there is minus
160 degrees
so the same physical processes but based
on different chemicals
so that was saturn and as a final object
we're just going to
right on the horizon here at the helix
nebula
absolutely beautiful object if you can
track it down
this is a planetary nebula it's perhaps
the most
impressive you can see right in the
center the white dwarf star that little
white speck
that's the dead core of the star that
has blown off its outer layers
to make those very beautiful smoke ring
patterns
of glowing hydrogen gas in space and
that's really
very very tricky to see from the uk
because it's only just above the horizon
for about half an
hour at this time of year right in the
middle of the night
so you need a very very low southern
horizon
in order to catch that one but it's
worth trying
so i'm afraid our time has now come to
an end we're going to run
time forward towards dawn to about 4
30 and we will see the stars fade
honestly satellites whizz across of
course there are
so many of them up there these days that
you can hardly avoid them
but do try and follow along and track
down some of those objects
and i hope you managed to so thank you
very much for listening and we'll see
you again
for the next one in a month's time